Added the option for a server-generated nonce in the DPoP proof (#81)
danielfett/draft-dpop: main.md

resource). The effect of this likely simplifies the logistics of phased 
upgrades to protected resources in their support DPoP or even 
prolonged deployments of protected resources with mixed token type support. 

# Authorization Server-Provided Nonce {#ASNonce}

Including a nonce value contributed by the authorization server in the DPoP proof

> MAY used by authorization servers to limit the lifetime of DPoP proofs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MAY be used by authorization servers to limit the lifetime of DPoP proofs.
```

Author: Done - thanks

The server is in control of when to require the use of a new nonce value
in subsequent DPoP proofs.
Without employing such a mechanism, a malicious party controlling the client
(including potentially the end user)
can create DPoP proofs for use arbitrarily far in the future.
This section specifies how server-provided nonces are used with DPoP.

> An authorization server MAY supply a nonce value to be included by the client

Reviewer 2: snippet from https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/oauth/AiWXXnw5bVN4ePUVcbYFBVQGoRc/

Kind of a protocol compile error, if you will. The Authorization Server-Provided Nonce section uses the 'WWW-Authenticate: DPoP ... ' header in a 401 response to a token request to ask that a nonce be included in the DPoP proof in the subsequent request(s), which is sent as the value of the DPoP header. But based on the definition in this document and the underlying RFC7235, a 'WWW-Authenticate: DPoP' header is requesting that a 'Authorization: DPoP <access-token>' header be sent in the subsequent requests. The 'Authorization: DPoP <access-token>' header is only sent to protected resources. The way Authorization header is defined (can only have one in a request) and sometimes used for client secret basic auth are some of the reasons the DPoP proof is defined as separate header and not part of the Authorization header. Unfortunately, the result is that the error/challenge mechanics need to be slightly different between the AS and RS. I think the Authorization Server-Provided Nonce needs to be provided to the client in some other way. Perhaps as a parameter in the JSON of a token endpoint error response. Or in a header somehow. Or something else that I'm not thinking of. But the way it is in the PR right now doesn't semantically work.

Reviewer 2: I think @danielfett 's suggestion of a new header that's applicable to all three situations (AS, RS and nonce) is probably the best path forward.

Author: The new `DPoP-Nonce` header suggestion works for me.  I'll plan to revise the PR accordingly.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if there can be confusion around the DPoP Nonce vs. the OIDC Nonce. In particular, it would be bad if an implementer reads that the DPoP nonce must be the same as the ID token nonce (chosen by the client/RP). This would lead to a situation where an AS uses the more-or-less static value of the RP-selected nonce for the DPoP Nonce instead of a freshly chosen random one. 

I suggest to add at least a heads-up somewhere. Or we could call the claim for the nonce in the JWT 'dnc' or similar, to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 2: I'd previously started writing a whole manifesto on why 'nonce' isn't the right term here. But decided to focus on other stuff, like the WWW-Authenticate, that seemed more important to address. But since you brought it up...

Reviewer 2: The  registered nonce claim is a "Value used to associate a Client session with an ID Token" which is not what is going on in DPoP. But this isn't a hill I want to fight on. 

 https://www.iana.org/assignments/jwt/jwt.xhtml

Author: I realize that the registration language is more specific than our use.  However, our use does exactly match the definition in the IETF Security Glossary in RFC 4949, which says:

> nonce (I) A random or non-repeating value that is included in data exchanged by a protocol, usually for the purpose of guaranteeing liveness and thus detecting and protecting against replay attacks. (See: fresh.)

Reviewer 2: Fair enough. Perhaps some kind of registry update is in order?

Author: I completely support the idea of a registry update.  I propose updating the description at https://www.iana.org/assignments/jwt/jwt.xhtml#claims from "Value used to associate a Client session with an ID Token" to "Value used to associate a Client session with an ID Token (MAY also be used for other kinds of nonces in other kinds of JWTs)".  I can do that as part of the OpenID Connect Core errata updates.

in DPoP proofs sent to it by responding to requests not including a nonce
with a WWW-Authenticate response supplying a nonce value to be used
when sending the subsequent request.

For example, in response to a token request without a nonce when the server requires one,
the server can respond with a WWW-Authenticate value such as the following to provide
a nonce value to include in the DPoP proof:
!---
```
 HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
 WWW-Authenticate: DPoP nonce="eyJ7S_zG.eyJH0-Z.HX4w-7v",
   error="use_nonce", error_description="AS requires nonce in DPoP proof"
```
!---

> Figure: HTTP 401 Response to a Token Request Without a Nonce

Author: Done - thanks.

the initial one was supplied:
by using a WWW-Authenticate response as specified above.
Of course, each time this happens it requires an extra round trip.

A more efficient manner of supplying a new once value is also defined --
by including the `nextnonce` parameter of the `Authentication-Info` header
in the `200 OK` response from the previous request,
as defined in Section 3.5 of [@RFC7616].

The client MUST use the new nonce value supplied for the next token request,
and for all subsequent token requests until the authorization server
supplies a new nonce.

An example 200 OK response providing a new nonce value is:
!---
```
 HTTP/1.1 200 OK
 Authentication-Info: nextnonce="eyJ7S_zG.eyJbYu3.xQmBj-1"
```
!---
Figure: HTTP 200 Response Providing the Next Nonce Value

# Resource Server-Provided Nonce {#RSNonce}

Resource servers can also choose to provide a nonce value to be included
in DPoP proofs sent to them.
They do so in exactly the same way that authorization servers do.

Note that the nonces provided by the two kinds of servers are different
and MUST not be confused with one another.
In particular, a nonce provided to the client by a particular server

> MUST only be used with that server and no other.

Reviewer 3: It would be good to clarify what a server is. I would expect that a nonce must never be sent to a different origin.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. It's maybe delineated by origin and, if one was provided, realm. Maybe?

Author: I'm really reluctant to add the use of `realm`, as it's a little-used feature and would create additional error conditions to check for.  For instance, what do you do if the realm is wrong?

In practice, no harm would come from using the wrong nonce at a server, other than that it wouldn't be accepted.  That's not a security problem - it's just a code bug.  And it would be quickly corrected by the developer so that the resulting code would work.

Reviewer 2: Understand the reluctance around `realm`. I was kinda just thinking out loud. And it seemed like a proper way to further scope where a nonce would be used. But `realm` is little-used and not well understood so might be more trouble than it's worth.

Author: Removed uses of `realm` from the examples, in consultation with @bc-pi , as they added no value.

# Authorization Server-Provided Nonce {#ASNonce}

Including a nonce value contributed by the authorization server in the DPoP proof
MAY be used by authorization servers to limit the lifetime of DPoP proofs.
The server is in control of when to require the use of a new nonce value
in subsequent DPoP proofs.
Without employing such a mechanism, a malicious party controlling the client
(including potentially the end user)
can create DPoP proofs for use arbitrarily far in the future.
This section specifies how server-provided nonces are used with DPoP.

An authorization server MAY supply a nonce value to be included by the client
in DPoP proofs sent to it by responding to requests not including a nonce
with a `DPoP-Nonce` HTTP header in the response supplying a nonce value to be used
when sending the subsequent request.

For example, in response to a token request without a nonce when the authorization server requires one,
the authorization server can respond with a `DPoP-Nonce` value such as the following to provide
a nonce value to include in the DPoP proof:
!---
```
 HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
 DPoP-Nonce: eyJ7S_zG.eyJH0-Z.HX4w-7v

 {

>   "error": "use_dpop_nonce"

Reviewer: We need to define this error in the OAuth Extensions Error Registry for both `Token endpoint response` as well as for `Resource access error response`.

Reviewer 2: true ^

Author: I'll address Filip's comments (thanks Filip!) then I think we should merge this and publish.

Reviewer 2: there are a few other changes from list discussions that should get in prior to publishing

using a DPoP proof including the supplied nonce value in the `nonce` claim
of the DPoP proof.
An example unencoded JWT Payload of such a DPoP proof including a nonce is:
!---
```
 {
  "jti": "-BwC3ESc6acc2lTc",
  "htm": "POST",
  "htu": "https://server.example.com/token",
  "iat": 1562262616,
  "nonce": "eyJ7S_zG.eyJH0-Z.HX4w-7v"
 }
```
!---
Figure: DPoP Proof Payload Including a Nonce Value

The nonce syntax in ABNF as used by [@RFC6749]
(which is the same as the `scope-token` syntax) is:

!---
```
  nonce = 1*NQCHAR
```
!---
Figure: Nonce ABNF

The nonce is opaque to the client.

If the `nonce` claim in the DPoP proof of a token request
does not exactly match the nonce supplied by the authorization server to the client,
the authorization server MUST reject the request.
The rejection response MAY include a `DPoP-Nonce` HTTP header
providing a new nonce value to use for subsequent requests.

## Providing a New Nonce Value

It is up to the authorization server when to supply a new nonce value
for the client to use.
The client is expected to use the existing supplied nonce in DPoP proofs
until the server supplies a new nonce value.

> The authorization server MAY supply the new once in the same way that
> the initial one was supplied:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authorization server MAY supply the new nonce in the same way that
the initial one was supplied:
```

by using a `DPoP-Nonce` HTTP header in the response.
Of course, each time this happens it requires an extra protocol round trip.

> A more efficient manner of supplying a new once value is also defined --

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more efficient manner of supplying a new nonce value is also defined --
```

by including a `DPoP-Nonce` HTTP header
in the `200 OK` response from the previous request.
The client MUST use the new nonce value supplied for the next token request,
and for all subsequent token requests until the authorization server
supplies a new nonce.

An example 200 OK response providing a new nonce value is:
!---
```
 HTTP/1.1 200 OK
 DPoP-Nonce: eyJ7S_zG.eyJbYu3.xQmBj-1
```
!---
Figure: HTTP 200 Response Providing the Next Nonce Value

# Resource Server-Provided Nonce {#RSNonce}

Resource servers can also choose to provide a nonce value to be included
in DPoP proofs sent to them.
They provide the nonce using the `DPoP-Nonce` header in same way that authorization servers do.

> The error signalling is performed as described in (#http-auth-scheme).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The error signaling is performed as described in (#http-auth-scheme).
```

server-provided nonce values rather than clock times,
yielding intended results even in the face of arbitrarily large clock skews.

Server-provided nonces are an effective means of preventing DPoP proof replay.

## DPoP Proof Pre-Generation (#Pre-Generation)

An attacker in control of the client can pre-generate DPoP proofs for use
arbitrarily far into the future by choosing the `iat` value in the
DPoP proof to be signed by the proof-of-possession key.
Note that one such attacker is the person who is the legitimate user of the client.
The user may pre-generate DPoP proofs to exfiltrate
from the machine possessing the proof-of-possession key
upon which they were generated
and copy them to another machine that does not possess it.
For instance, a bank employee might pre-generate DPoP proofs
on a bank computer and then copy them to another machine
for use in the future, thereby bypassing bank audit controls.
When DPoP proofs can be pre-generated and exfiltrated,
all that is actually being proved in DPoP protocol interactions
is proof of possesion of a DPoP proof -- not of the proof-of-possession key.

Use of server-provided nonces can prevent this attack.

> By providing new nonce values at times of its choosing,

Reviewer 3: ... nonce values that are not predictable by an attacker ...

Author: Done - thanks

the server can limit the lifetime of DPoP proofs,
preventing pre-generated DPoP proofs from being used.

> When server-provided nonces are used, proof of possesion

Reviewer 3: *possession

of the proof-of-possession key is being demonstrated --

> not just proof of possesion of a DPoP proof.

Reviewer 3: *possession

Author: Done - thanks

Note: To accommodate for clock offsets, the server MAY accept DPoP
proofs that carry an `iat` time in the reasonably near future (e.g., a few
seconds in the future).
Because clock skews between servers and clients may be large,
servers may choose to limit DPoP proof lifetimes by using
server-provided nonce values rather than clock times,
yielding intended results even in the face of arbitrarily large clock skews.

Server-provided nonces are an effective means of preventing DPoP proof replay.

## DPoP Proof Pre-Generation {#Pre-Generation}

An attacker in control of the client can pre-generate DPoP proofs for use
arbitrarily far into the future by choosing the `iat` value in the
DPoP proof to be signed by the proof-of-possession key.
Note that one such attacker is the person who is the legitimate user of the client.
The user may pre-generate DPoP proofs to exfiltrate
from the machine possessing the proof-of-possession key

> upon which they were generated
> and copy them to another machine that does not possess it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and copy them to another machine that does not possess the key.
```

For instance, a bank employee might pre-generate DPoP proofs
on a bank computer and then copy them to another machine
for use in the future, thereby bypassing bank audit controls.
When DPoP proofs can be pre-generated and exfiltrated,
all that is actually being proved in DPoP protocol interactions
is possesion of a DPoP proof -- not of the proof-of-possession key.

Use of server-provided nonce values that are not predictable by attackers can prevent this attack.
By providing new nonce values at times of its choosing,
the server can limit the lifetime of DPoP proofs,
preventing pre-generated DPoP proofs from being used.

> When server-provided nonces are used, possesion

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When server-provided nonces are used, possession
```

of the proof-of-possession key is being demonstrated --

> not just possesion of a DPoP proof.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
not just possession of a DPoP proof.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: It should go without saying, but...
```suggestion
## DPoP Nonce Downgrade

A server MUST NOT accept any DPoP proofs without the `nonce` claim when replay protection via the DPoP nonce is intended.
```
